We left off creating this manual
low level server which is, yeah,
pretty good, pretty impressive, I like it.
But you're not gonna
ship this to production.
So what you wanna do instead
is use this amazing tool,
probably one of my most favorite
packages in the whole npm ecosystem,
a whole node ecosystem,
it's called express.
It's such a fitting name because you
literally can create a server super fast,
like you're on the expressway.
So the way we're going to use
this is we're going to npm
install express followed by
these two other packages.
So let's talk about these for
a little bit.
Express is a framework for
building servers, short and sweet.
Body-parser is a middleware that
parses incoming requests, and
morgan is a middleware for
logging incoming requests.
So what is this word middleware?
Well, middleware is basically, if you
think of a request coming in on a server,
let's look at this.
So requests coming in on the server,
here it is, that means this callback is
gonna be called every single
time a request comes in.
You can think of middleware as like
a little piece of functionality that sits
in between what you eventually wanna do
with the request and when it came in.
It's like a pipe of plugins that
can manipulate the request,
it can inspect the request, it can do
whatever it wants to the request before it
eventually sends it to another middleware
or, in this case the controller.
It's like you have a sandwich,
one side of the bread would be the client,
the other side of the bread would, no, one
side of the bread would be the incoming
request and
other side of bread would be the response.
And then somewhere in
the middle is the middleware.
Like all the stuff that's in the middle,
and
then the piece of meat is the controller,
right?
So the middleware is like all the toppings
that just adds all the extra stuff to
whatever meat or veggie patty you got
going on there, that's middleware.
So body-parser and morgan are those two.
We're gonna use body parser to basically
give us access to the incoming request,
so we don't have to do the chunks anymore.
We can just look at it like
a JavaScript object, would be great.
And then we use morgan to just give us
some log, so we can see the request being
logged on our server, that way we
know an actual request came in.
It's great for debugging,
it's great for recognizing if and
when someone requested you.
You should never go to production without
having some type of request logging
mechanism.
Because one of the most common debugging
things you have to do as a back end
engineer or a full stack engineer is
looking at the logs to see when or what or
how something happened.
And if you're not logging,
you're not winning, I don't know,
you need to be logging,
so we're gonna log here.
So let's get started, we're gonna make
like a simple little todos API that
creates todos and
sends the todos back, very simple.
So like always I have the code here,
you can copy and paste,
but you can also just follow along
with me if you would like to.
So we're gonna do just that.
So I'm just gonna keep this
one here because why not?
Let's make another file, and
I'm gonna call this one server.mjs,
and I'll add it to our server file.
And we need to do some installations,
so we're going to stop the server,
we're gonna npm install express morgan And
body-parser like that,
oops, I wanna save that.
So I stopped the install by hitting
Ctrl + C, and then I came back and
ran it again and saved it.
So we got that,
looking good, looking good.
And so I just noticed I clicked
on this node modules folder and
you'll see that there's
a .bin folder here.
That means that there's something that I
installed from node or from npm that has
like a cli shipped with it, and if I go
look at it looks like there's a mime cli.
But I didn't install mime,
I'm guessing express did or
one of the tools that express uses
has a cli associated with it.
Because that means this package somewhere,
whatever is creating this mime
thing has a bin property on it's
package.json whose key is called mime,
that's why that's there.
So this is what it looks like when your
cli gets installed on someone's machine,
it looks like this,
it gets added to a .bin folder with the
name of that field that you put on bin.
So that's why that's important and
it happens during installation of npm,
when npm installs your package.
Anyway, let's go back to our server and
let's import express from express and
we'll import What was it?
Yeah, body-parser,
was called a bp from body-parser and
then imports morgan from morgan,
so we got all of those.
Now, with express,
we need to create an app, so
we'll say app = express,
like that, so now we have our app.
And then we want to go ahead and
set up our middleware first, and
then followed by our routes, and
then lastly, we will open the server,
we'll listen and we'll be good to go.
So let's set up our middleware.
So the way we can do that is we can
say app.use, that's a method, and
we can parse in an array of middleware,
we can parse in one middleware,
we can make one in mime right
here with an anonymous function.
We're gonna use body-parser,
I'm gonna say bp, and
I'll actually want to use
something called URL encoded and
I'll parse in an option
that says extended true.
Basically what this is going to give us
is if someone parses some data on a query
string, it's gonna parse that for
us and it basically just make sure that
we can parse the query string and
whatever is in the URL pretty easily.
We probably won't be using this in this
example, but it's useful, and then
the other one we want to do is app.use
bp.json, this one we will be using.
This one allows us to parse the json
body of a POST requests, so
we can actually see it as json and
not like bits of chunks that we have to
add together like we
did in the http server.
And the last one we want to do is morgan.
So we'll say morgan and will parse in dev,
is just the type of logging that you want,
I think there's different options here.
Let's see, so you can parse in, there's
like different formats you could do, we're
just gonna parse in dev here, maybe if I
take this away, it'll show me, let's see.
Yeah, there's combined some other options,
I always just use dev,
cuz it's the shortest one, it's giving
me the simplest amount of information.
So now that we got our middleware,
we need to set up some routes.
Before we do that, let's create a little
database so we can store our todos.
So I'm gonna say db = an array, and
now we're gonna set up some routes.
So I wanna route to where if I POST to
slash todos, it'll create a new todo and
add it to the database and
then send that back.
And if I do a get request to slash todos,
it will just send me back all the todos.
So I'm gonna say app dot
followed by the verb that I want,
so in this case I want to do the POST.
So app.post, that's a method,
first argument is going to be
the path that I want to receive.
I said I want todos, so
I'm gonna say todos, and
then I'm gonna say todo actually,
keep it singular.
And then whatever controller
you can think of it as like,
what callback do you want to run when
someone does this POST requests, okay?
And just like the http server because
guess what, express uses the HTTP
server underneath it,
we get this request and response objects.
And you'll see this pretty much in every
single node js server implementation,
whether it's express or happy, or
whatever server framework you use.
They pretty much all use request response
best cuz they're all using the http module
which uses request and response, so
it's very common to see this pattern.
So we're going to say, okay, cool,
we want to first grab this todo and
add it to the database, so let's do that.
So we'll say new todo and that's gonna
equal an object, we'll just say the ideas,
I don't know, Date.now, so
I don't like incremented IDs, and
then the text is gonna be whatever
is on the request.body.txt.
So that means someone's gonna
POST an object to this server and
that object is gonna have a text property
on it, and the value of that text property
is gonna be whatever is gonna be saved
here and that is todo, and that's it.
So now we got to need todo and
I'm gonna say db.push
are new ToDo here like that,
and I'm gonna say res.json newToDo.
And that's simple I was
able to create it ToDo,
push it in our database and
then respond back really simply.
So we're gonna do the same
thing before get requests, so
I'm gonna say app.get/to do.
Remember, a route is a combination of a
verb and a path, the verb here is a POST,
the path is todo, the verb pairs get,
but the path is also todo.
So although they both the same routes,
they're different paths cuz it says
a get verb associated with it.
So it's gonna only be activated when
someone does a get request to this
route or to this path.
So request to response And
then, for a get request,
all you wanna do is just say res.json(db).
Let's just show all the todos,
that's pretty much it.
And the next thing is we want to start
our server so we can listen on it, so
we'll say app.listen,
looks familiar, right?
If we go back to here,
is that what we did here, server.listen?
It's really, like I said
an abstraction around http module,
which already does this.
So we'll say app.listen, we don't have to
parse in a host here, it'll default to
localhost for us or whatever host you're
on, and we just need to give it a port.
So I'm gonna just give
it the same port 8000,
and it does take a callback optionally.
If you want to use that and
we'll just pretty much do the same thing,
console.log server on http localhost 8000.
So we'll do that, and
that's gonna be our server.
So let's give it a try and
see what happens.
So, we will come here,
we will run server in js,
and you can see we still get the same
output server on http localhost 8000.
So first I'm gonna do
a get request to 8000.
No other route, no slash todo,
just a get request and
I should get a, cannot get,
I get a 404 not found.
Why is that?
Pretty sure we just created a server,
it seems like it's working, so
why is it saying it isn't found?
Well, it's because I didn't register for
a route of the verb get in the path slash,
so it just 404.
So if I want to get rid of that I
would make a route for app.get/ and
I would handle that.
Or I could do like a catch all somewhere
down here that says, if someone tries to
make a request to anything that's not
the stuff that I just put above here,
then show that.
And that's how you can handle errors
without your app crashing and
stuff like that with express.
So there's many ways to do that,
it depends on whatever logic you want, but
that's why that's there.
So that's actually a good sign that
we see that because that's what we
intend to happen cuz we don't have
a route registered for that path and
verb combination.
So what we'll do, is we will actually hit
one that works, let's do a POST request.
I'm gonna start the server again,
I'm gonna use my http pi and
I'm gonna do a POST request to /todo,
and I'm going to post the text property.
So this text says I need to eat more
food today, I don't eat enough,
I should eat more than I actually I'm,
I got to be too busy, I don't know.
So, we'll do that, and you can see, I get
a 200 and it sends back this json objects,
says here's the ID which I put
date.now and then our text.
So I'm gonna add some
more Clean up my closet.
I just drop my clothes at the bottom
of the closet sometime so
I need to clean it up, there we go.
So we got two todos now,
the server is still running,
if you look at these nice little
pretty logs we have, this is morgan.
This is that middleware
that's logging this for us.
You can see we got one request
coming in it was a POST /todo status
code 200 and
it took 3.60 milliseconds to function.
I have no idea what this number is with
morgan but I'm guessing some time or
something, and
then the other one took even less.
So super fast, as you can see,
this is just a local machine
doing really good here.
Now let's actually see if we can pull
those todos down with the get request.
Before we do it,
the server hasn't stopped,
it's been running this whole time.
And I was putting those todos to an array,
so that means I'm anticipating that
because this server is still running,
and because I pushed them to an array,
that those objects should still
be floating in memory right now.
It should still be sitting around
waiting for me to pull them down.
And that would only happen if
the server was still running,
it didn't stop like our
other node programs did.
So let's prove that theory, and
let's do a get request to /todo.
And you can see here we get an array
of both of the todos that we have.
Because we're still running the server,
they're still in memory and
everything still works, and you can see
we do get a get to /todo 200, good to go.
I think this number is like how much data
was sent back, that makes more sense.
So maybe that's what that is.
I am going to stop the server and start
it again, and then I'm going to do that,
you'll see that nothing comes back
because I stopped the server and
there was no data in memory.
Yeah, so as you can see, let's just
kind of compare apples to apples here.
So I'm gonna try to, I forgot the shortcut
to open this up in a new thing,
it's like Command + K, I don't know
the shortcut anymore, how do we do this?
There we go, split right, here we go.
So let's close this,
I think this is like Command + B, okay, so
we got the server here,
which is an express and
then we got the http server,
which is just regular old http.
So, if you look at the amount of code,
it's about the same to be honest.
But in my opinion,
this is just a lot easier to understand,
a lot more expressive, and
it's actually doing more.
So although there's about the same amount
of code, this is way more efficient,
it's doing a lot more.
We need to be registering the routes
up here, we just had like a handler for
a POST and that was it.
This thing has a database,
a couple of routes,
it's doing a lot more with
the same amount of code.
So as you can see, it can get pretty
crazy, if you take advantage of something
like express versus trying
to build this out yourself.
It would be a lot more code to
get the same functionality.
Any questions on express and the plugin,
the middleware that I added
here to get this work?
The question was, can we customize the
response codes in the express controllers,
and the answer is, of course you can.
So the POST we can say res.set header,
which is pretty much the same thing,
but I think the one we want is status.
So if you say rest.status,
I can say 201, save that,
stop this, start that, and
let's do another POST here,
and you can see I got a 201, right?
So yeah,
you get the res.status to change it.
I think you can also do like,
you can change this,
you can see like res.status.json,
and then just do that.
I think that works too,
we're about to find out.
Yeah, that works too.